these are really important Health tools
that are not being discussed but this is
how we should be looking at health so
the first thing is do Mindy pelts the
renowned health expert is back and she's
on a mission to empower people to take
control of their health through fasting
nutrition and lifestyle changes we are
in a crisis of health and your health
right now may not be your fault but it
is your responsibility so I have
questions what is the lie about the food
environment the biggest lie is that that
all food is safe there are foods that
are medicine and there are foods that
will build disease how do we need the
difference learn to read an ingredient
label so the first thing I do is I
interesting are there foods that are
cancer feeding yep so there's processed
Meats Sugar's a biggie the toxic oils
and donuts juice boxes horrific how
important is our liver in all of this
the most important is there any symptoms
of an unhealthy liver yes they call them
checklist first you can look at the
bottom of your feet do you want to put
it up on the table no cuz people will
sell
pictures how many times a day do you
think we should be eating great question
and studies show us that the longer you
spend not eating the more your body
heals itself and starts to burn belly
fat but a zmek has a tool for achieving
the same outcome but one of the biggest
consequences we've seen is this is why
I'm such a fasting fan what are some of
the Lesser known benefits of fasting
there's a whole bunch of them but I'm
going to say the biggest biggest thing
is
we've just hit 6 million subscribers on
the D Co um so me and my team would like
to do something we've never done before
as little thank you and we're calling it
The di a subscriber raffle and here is
how it works every episode this month
we're going to pick three current
subscribers at random and we'll send one
of you a 1,000 voucher one of you
tickets to come and watch the dire SE
behind the scenes live with our team and
one of you will have a 10-minute phone
call with me to discuss whatever you
want to talk about if you're a
subscriber you're in the raffle thank
thank you from the bottom of my heart
for allowing me to do something that me
and my team love doing so much it is the
greatest honor of my lifetime and I hope
it I hope it continues uh off into the
Future Let's get to the
[Music]
episode Dr Mindy last time we sat here
the conversation we had reached more
than 10 million people across YouTube
and Spotify and I player and Airlines
and everywhere and I was looking through
some of the feedback from that ation and
there's two of these top comments that I
pulled out which I think kind of capture
the impact it had on so many people the
first comment is from A lady called Anne
and she said Dr Mindy changed my life I
started intermittent fasting six months
ago after I watched this podcast and
I've dropped £18 and have never felt or
looked
better the second comment I pulled out
was from a
57-year-old lady who said going through
menopause morbidly obese going through a
lot of stress in my person personal life
and fasting because if Dr Mindy has
finally saved me I've been doing a 36 to
48 hour test every week to fast and it
has really bolstered my confidence and I
can now do really hard things thank
you
wow there's so much on that one there's
so much on that one that second one I
mean that's that is
empowerment those two got empowered but
that last woman got really empowered she
did that for herself and she knows it as
she can do hard things she is absolutely
right it has really bolstered my
confidence and I can now do hard
things it's not typically what you think
of when you think of fasting that it
gives you confidence and the ability to
um do hard things in other areas of your
life yeah yeah and you know that I I've
heard you interview guests like this and
I heard many people talk about how easy
we've made life right now you know you
can sit on your couch and you can you
don't have to get off the couch and food
will appear at your door and you can
control your TV your TV and you can call
a friend and there's so much you can do
without even moving it life has gotten
so easy that we are losing that ability
to really learn how powerful we are and
for women it with health it it's gotten
even worse so what I love about that
comment is that she took the information
she applied it she got a
result kind words to me but she deserves
all the credit and she feels different
not just physically but emotionally and
and what she's capable of like those are
the comments that just blow me away
because only you can close your mouth
and nauy
and I guess it tells you something about
yourself when you're able to do that
which is I guess resisting some kind of
Temptation Y which is you know you're
building evidence with yourself that I
am the type of person that has control
and autonomy over my destiny and it's
remarkable how much that must impact
your professional life your
relationships your all these kind of
things your ability to put other
boundaries in place in your life yeah um
and it all starts with the simple
discipline which is you know fasting
yeah were you were you surprised at the
impact that this book fast like a girl
had
it it has blown me away um I knew when I
wrote the book that I had a formula that
worked because I had spent 10 years in
my practice using it with women I'd seen
the kind of results like you just read
over and over again then I took those
results and I took them to my YouTube
channel and I started teaching it on
YouTube and I and I don't know if every
YouTube uh Creator does this but I would
always ask questions and I would say to
people give me answers as to how this is
working for you and then I had a team of
people that went in and gathered those
answers we looked at patterns and that's
how the information in fast like a girl
was born is it was not just an idea it
wasn't just science but it was when I
wrote it it was like oh we already seen
this across hundreds of thousands of
women that it's going to work but you
never really know until you put a book
like that out into the world how it's
all going to unfold and how it's going
to be received
in in a year and a half worldwide
77,000 copies of that book of on all
styles that's audio Audible and ebook
and hard cover uh the amount of reviews
positive reviews the amount of DMS we've
had I had to double my staff to be able
to answer the DMs like I I have actually
picked the book
up more than 10 times and asked myself
what did I put in there like why is this
connecting so much because there's
something where women just were finally
given a tool that worked and it didn't
cost money and it didn't take time and
it didn't give her power away and she
saw that and and that that part blew me
away is that is that why it connects
because it's not expensive complicated
it's not um something you need a
prescription for
yeah yeah well think about it you go
into your doctor's office you have a
long list of symptoms you give those
symptoms over to your doc doctor he or
she gives you an official title of that
symptom you're like oh finally somebody
understands it and so you go and maybe
you take the diagnosis the prescription
or the treatment you go fulfill the
treatment let's say the drug Works
you're like the doctor was amazing the
drug was amazing there's no empowerment
in that at all now if the pill doesn't
work then what ends up happening is you
go back to the doctor and you're like
hey pill didn't work and the doctor says
okay well let's try a different pill and
then you try a different pill and you do
that like three or four times and if it
still doesn't work then what happens is
now you go to a different doctor you're
like I got to go to a different doctor
this one's not working and we keep
Outsourcing our power looking for
answers somebody show me somebody show
me but with fasting what happened is we
showed this idea of metabolic switching
where there's a time to eat and there's
a time not to eat and the longer you
spend not eating the more your body
heals itself and that concept I think
women had never really had had grabbed
before and it was a a tool that was so
available they could listen to your P to
the podcast we did and apply it like an
hour later
and all of a sudden again the only
person to give credit to is
yourself and so I don't I mean maybe
exercise exercise would be that tool
what other tools do we have that make
you feel that powerful that quickly what
is if someone has never come across the
concept of fasting before which I think
is probably quite um implausible now but
can you give me the sort of the sort of
like evolutionary basis for fast thing
why does why does it help and where were
we told a lie like where did we take a
wrong turn in the last thousand years
which made us I don't know just become
really gluttonous and have five meals a
day and so on well let's start with how
what fasting is and then I'll dive into
the L the lie I have a lot of thoughts
on the LIE um if we go back to hunter
gatherer days you know we I one thing
that blows me away is that the human
body we're living in is literally the
same
it's the same as the hunter gathers but
what we're sitting in what we're exposed
to the physical emotional chemical
stressors that are handed to us every
single day is completely like opposite
what the Hunter and gatherers were doing
so if I go back to the Hunter and
gatherers they came out of the cave they
didn't have door Dash they didn't have a
refrigerator they didn't know how to get
food they had to go find food now if
blood sugar is going down and they've
got to go find food and they pass out
you know 100 yards from the from the
cave then we wouldn't be sitting here
right
now but that didn't happened what
happened is they went out to go hunt and
the longer they were away trying to find
food the more they metabolically
switched into this other fuel source
called the ketogenic Energy System I
like to call it the fat burning system
because what their body did we were like
a hybrid car the body was like okay
blood sugar's going down okay time to
switch over to our other fuel source
we're going to pop in and start burning
fat and make a ketone and then that
Ketone went up into their brain
sharpened their focus and made them even
stronger to go find
food today we don't do that we don't
ever lean into this other system that
our Hunter and gather ancestors had to
lean into we don't have there's so much
oversaturation of food and ideas and
stimulation coming at us that we never
had to there are like biological
processes in our bodies that we're not
even accessing anymore but they exist I
I think you and I talked about this last
time uh in the book I talk about
something called the Thrifty Gene
hypothesis now it's a hypothesis and the
idea was the humans that came out of
that hunter gatherer time had a gene
that allowed them to switch over into
the fat burning system and make it a
ketone in the absence of food and so all
the people that survived that time
period they morphed into what we're
looking at as each other right now
because the ones that didn't have that
genetic profile didn't live so they
they're no longer with us so now we're
sitting with this Thrifty Gene inside of
us eating all day and what they believe
is happening is that because we're not
accessing that Gene that the people that
are suffering now is on the opposite are
the ones that are not tapping in to the
fat burning system the ones that are not
accessing that are actually killing
themselves because they're not in
alignment with their own biology kind of
have a lot of empathy for them in some
respects because of you know it's it's
difficult isn't it when we're surrounded
by this much free cheap glucose
sugar you know carbohydrates to fight
back against the environment you live in
kind of what we're asking people to do
it's like fight their natural urges
presumably the brain it also has a gene
which says listen if you see sugar you
better grab it and put it in your mouth
yep and there's some microbes doing that
too oh really yeah yeah there there can
be fungus in your gut that tells your
taste buds hey I need more sugar because
they got to stay alive M are our taste
buds have been completely hijacked by
all the chemicals poured onto our food
so we don't we get so much dopamine now
from food that sometimes all we have to
do is walk into a grocery store and look
at our favorite food and see it in the
aisle we haven't even picked it up put
it in the the basket we're like ooh that
potato chip I love that potato chip and
that's creating a dopamine response in
our brain because our bra our our brain
knows when I eat that I get dopamine and
what is the LIE then we talked about the
lie that's been told to people about the
food environment about five meals a day
Etc what is that lie and why were we
told the LIE the biggest lie is that all
food is
safe not all food is safe and a part of
that lie is I can walk into my grocer
store and it's already been vetted for
my
health now I can tell you in the America
that's not the case we have a category
of food called grass generally
recognized as safe in our country and
basically what the FDA can do is the F
FDA can put chemicals under this
category when it hasn't been
scientifically proven to be safe they
can repackage them and put them in this
category of generally recognized at safe
the idea is that we have a innocent
until proven guilty philosophy around
food and it's even gone even even even
further where within their own in
Administration in the FDA people are
saying that the f is silent they don't
care about the food and then if you go
even further and you think about it how
do we have Food and Drug together in the
same Administration if we really cared
about food
we would actually pull it out separate
and we would have a bigger better
analysis of food so the LIE is that all
food is safe that's not true at all all
there are foods that will are
medicine and there are foods that will
build disease and just because we call
them both food doesn't mean they're safe
you have to know the
difference how how do we know the
difference well the first thing is learn
to read in ingredient label so which
then do you know how to read an
ingredient label I would say no so the
first thing I do on every anything
that's packaged is I go straight to the
ingredients and it this is so easy all
you've got to do is look at those
ingredients and ask yourself do I
recognize do I know every single one of
those
ingredients and if you don't entertain
yourself and go look them up I I
actually did this with my nephew years
ago he brought me some frozen waffles
and he's like hey are the what do you
think are these safe and I said read
them out loud to me and he started to
read them out loud he was like 14 years
old at the time he started to read and
he couldn't get through like the third
ingredient in was a chemical and he's
like I don't know how to pronounce this
I said go look it up I want you to
Google it and look it up and tell me
what it is and he came back and he's
like wait a second what I just found is
that's a cancer-causing
chemical I said yeah
yeah you're right it is that's what the
that's what's happening is that these
chemicals are allowed in our food that
promote disease and so then once you
have that idea and you know the
ingredients are the most important and
you follow is it a chemical is it a real
food then the next thing you can do is
really stay away from anything with an
ingredient
label like when you go into a grocery
store walk around the outside don't go
into those middle aisles go to the
refrigerator SE sections go to the fresh
food if it doesn't have a label it's
it's it means it's its authentic self so
that it didn't they didn't denature it
they didn't change it it came from the
earth or it came from an animal whatever
your ethos is around there but it it
wasn't in put into an altered state
because what they do is they put these
things into Altered States so that they
taste better and they highjack your
taste bud so you'll come back for more
or they put it into an altered state so
that it can last longer on the Shelf
and if it lasts longer on the shelf that
chemical is lasting longer in
you the lie around frequency of
eating because you know when I grow up I
I breakfast lunch you might have
something a couple of snacks and then
have dinner and then you wake up the
next day and go through the same routine
of just basically eating every waking
hour of the day that you can and
snacking in between who told us this lie
and is it a lie because it kind of seems
to be the antithesis of
fasting yep well from what I can find
and I'm sure there's lots of ways we've
perpetuated this lie but breakfast is
the most important meal of the day was a
ad slogan for Kellogg's Corn Flakes back
in the 70s so Back in
1970 they had a hot new cereal and the
ad was eat it breakfast is the most
important meal of the day here we are in
2024 and people are still perpetuating
that ad
slogan so I've actually looked into the
re Arch on like if I eat more will it
speed up my
metabolism uh from what I can tell from
the research I can't find that now it
let's say we just leave the research out
of
it I would like to meet a human that has
eaten six meals a day and found that
that was a metabolism
stimulator like I don't know very many
people that say that so it it's like a
cultural lie that just got sort of
passed down and what happened when the
fasting research came out now you know
people like volter Longo people like
sain Panda like big fasting researchers
what they figured out was oh wait if we
compress our eating into a certain time
period like our ancestors did and we
left longer for fasting there's
something magical going on here and
those were the Giants that started to
show us that actually Tim restricted
eating is the most important thing thing
that we can be doing when it comes to
food what about calorie restricted
eating and how does is that the same
thing no thank you for asking that so
let's let's let's talk about both of
them in an everyday kind of scenario so
in time restriction you are saying I
have a certain time in my 24 hours where
I eat I compress my eating window and
then I have a time where I'm fasting so
I have an eating window and I have a
fasting window okay and I get to decide
how long how compressed that eating
window is and how long that fasting
window is the longer you go in the
fasting window what you're doing is
you're turning on these different
healing mechanisms and and that is
independent of calories coming in or not
coming in that is dependent on nutrients
not coming in that is dependent on
glucose going down and switching over to
burning fat so you make a ketone that
has nothing to do with calories
when you come over to calorie
restriction you're saying I'm going to
have X amount of calories a day I'm
going to Output x amount of calories and
I'm going to do that all day long so
very different
philosophies to me like it you're you're
creating a internal
mechanism with time restriction that is
going to stimulate a healing process and
it's nutrient deficiency along with
glucose drop it doesn't have to to do
with
calories as it relates to fasting since
we had the conversation something really
massive happened in culture which was
this word a zmek became really popular
and the drug of zek became really
popular I know there's various types of
it w GOI or something else there's lots
of different versions of it but fasting
as a tool is now quite established but a
zmek has a tool for achieving the same
outcomes what's your thoughts on that
yeah so now first I'm just going to say
I'm not an OIC expert so I can't tell
you the mechanisms behind that what I
will tell you is that again I'm a
supporter of the everyday person and the
first challenge we have with OIC is the
cost so is everybody going to be able to
afford that to be able to improve their
metabolic health I I I'm a I'm a
supporter of the single mom who's
working two jobs and is trying to just
put food on the table and O at
$800,000 us she's not going there a
month is is it a month okay so the first
thing is it's unattainable for so many
people second thing is that we've got a
challenge with some of the side effects
now there's been a lot of debate about
that and like you know the nausea and
all that like what is that um and some
people have it some people don't so you
have to personally decide if that works
for you or not the third issue is that
and and this is a in really interesting
recent stat is that within two years
people 70% of OIC users are off
OIC I don't know if it's cost I don't
know if it's discomfort I don't know
what it is but long term that's not a
phenomenal solution so with that in mind
let's unpack what the what's happening
from a symptomatology point of view with
OIC and the biggest thing is you are not
hungry okay so I can tell tell you
thousands and thousands and thousands of
comments those two women you started
this podcast off with when people learn
how to do a a fasting lifestyle their
hunger goes away it it is very now I've
never taken OIC so I can't tell you like
per se that if it would be the same
experience but when you learn to
metabolically switch your hunger goes
down because without food you go into
this ketogenic Energy System you get a
ketone it turns off hunger so the
biggest the biggest con one of the
biggest consequences we've seen in the
millions of people we've seen build
these fasting Lifestyles is they go I
just I'm not hungry anymore I can relate
yeah when I did a I did a ketogenic diet
for a while my Hunger levels seem to
drop as well is that a similar thing
yeah so cuz your blood sugar is stable
okay so you're not getting the spikes
and drops and spikes and drops okay that
Mak sense and and there's that much of
the reason why you end up losing weight
because you just end up eating a little
bit less as well as you you know you're
staying away from glucose and stuff but
yeah it's two it's that and then in
order to make a ketone you have to burn
fat like think about it let's put it in
OIC terms it would be like going to the
pharmacy and in order to pay your OIC
bill you had to give them a little piece
of fat and then of your fat mhm and then
you came home with the shot you plug it
in and now you're not hungry
okay that's what fasting is doing is
fasting is using your own fat to make
this byproduct called a ketone so you're
losing weight in the process of making
the Ketone and then the Ketone goes up
into the brain and actually shuts off
the hunger hormone and now you're not
hungry can't you see a world because I
think with um again this is my very
limited knowledge of medicine in the bio
biotech and pharmaceutical industry I
think what happens with patents like
medical patents is eventually they
expire I think they expire after about
10 years or something like that so
eventually the a zmek patent is going to
expire which means that other people can
produce that drug um I think the cost
will eventually therefore go down
especially as other people start
producing other iterations of the drug
yeah that becomes this price War um and
you'll have all these different versions
of a zek but at lower cost can you
foresee because I think I can a world
where most people in the western world
are taking some form of a zmek to
suppress hunger and it's it's casual I
don't I don't know if I want to see that
I I mean the first thing I'd like to see
is some long-term studies on this I'd
like to see let's let's give this a
little bit of time to see what how it
unfolds in the culture and how people
react to it and then we have to ask how
are are we studying this on women I'm
gonna I'm GNA be the fierce advocate for
making sure that this gets researched on
women so if we look at that world I
would say okay I'd only be willing to
entertain that thought if we have some
real clear data showing us longterm 20
30 40 years that it's going to be safe
second thing though that I want to say
on that and this I go back to what you
started this with do you feel empowered
Ian I know people are happy they're like
oh my God I finally lose weight they
feel really good in their body like I
don't want to dismiss that and I'm not
here to take that Joy or excitement away
from somebody who's losing weight with
those empics
I think a fasting lifestyle is a
phenomenal pair to OIC if that's you but
what I hear when people lose that amount
of weight that's is that when you look
at them you're like oh my God you lost
so much weight they're like yeah I'm on
OIC the ones that are like I'm going to
own it okay so OIC got the power when I
see somebody who lost weight from a
fasting lifestyle what they say is yeah
I started to learn how to fast and there
is an internal power that I did this for
myself so again we we rob them of that
internal experience if every cure
including weight loss is going to be
found in a pill how are we going to
believe in our own bodies you know the
most interesting take I've heard on why
as zek might be a
really negative thing for society is
actually the point you just made about
discipline and about you know we talked
at the start of this conversation about
the Comfort crisis and how everything's
getting easier we can date and eat and
whatever else from the comfort of our
own home and now with AI coming into the
world where we're going to have ai
agents where we can tell our devices to
go do things for us you've play it
forward a couple of years you're looking
at a world where we really don't have to
do anything like we don't have to move
we've really optimized discomfort
difficulty challenge out of our lives
and now as zek offers another solution
in that regard I know I know that it
saves lives and I think that's a really
amazing thing and if I was in such a
situation I would take it if my friends
family children were I would I'd be the
first to U make sure that they were
taking it to save their lives but you
know if we look back through history
we've trade we've made this trade-off
and regretted it repeatedly we've kind
of chosen comfort and um convenience at
the expense of something else which we
only find out 10 or 20 years later where
we go oh my God Jesus maybe having these
devices or being able to order food like
this or whatever else um was a bad idea
but we won't find out for 20 30 years
and it's it's really interesting to see
this almost counter movement in culture
where people are now this sort of um
counter movement of people that are
choosing difficulty the ice barath right
the hydro marathon where they're running
AC you know what I mean and that feels
like the counter movement to this sort
of comfort crisis um but as M actually
categorized as part of the Comfort
crisis because of the comment you I read
at the start from the lady who said it
bolstered my confidence and I can now do
hard things yeah and and do people say
that with OIC I mean it's a really
interesting point
and you know my general ethos on health
is that we should be looking within and
what we're capable of doing to heal I am
not a fan of Outsourcing our health and
this can even go down to the idea of of
ketones there's a lot of exogenous
ketones out there and people ask me all
the time should I take exogenous ketones
and my feeling is let's get you learning
how to metabolically switch so you can
make your own Ketone first and and if we
have to go into an exogenous Ketone we
will but the I don't that's another
Outsource like we just keep Outsourcing
and Outsourcing and Outsourcing until we
do not feel powerful in our own bodies
and 20 30 years of that is going to be a
serious human crisis I think it's I
think the principle that if we don't do
anything uncomfortable today we kind of
just dis defer the discomfort into the
future is a really wonderful principle
to live by you know what I mean like
it's and I'm not saying that in the
future you're going to necessarily have
a health a physical health issue or
metabolic health issue if you're
choosing comfort in terms of your
metabolic treeses today but you might
have a relationship issue because you
didn't learn you know to deal with
discomfort have uncomfortable
conversations you know so it's
interesting it's just these principles
for life and one of them also is that I
just think really wonderful principle
that I live by is that everything has a
cost and whenever someone presents you
with the idea that there's a miracle
drug or a miracle cure it's because we
haven't figured out the cost yet and the
uncertainty of not knowing the cost for
me is terrifying I'd rather someone said
listen this isn't this drug isn't
perfect and it has all these issues with
it and you're going to suffer in this
way but is the trade-off worth it for
you then to present it as a a miracle
drug and I kind of think asmc right now
is viewed as a bit of a miracle drug
which scares the hell out of me right
yeah and again we need we need more time
with the long-term studies and I you
know I I think what's confusing about
OIC is it does have some amazing
upsides and so we can't just totally
villainize it it's like oh there's some
interesting things to learn here and
people who are in a massive metabolic
crisis it can be a Lifeline to get them
out but again a line that I will
continue to hold is lifestyle lifestyle
lifestyle there is no free pass when it
comes to your health you h i mean we can
hack in from many different directions
we have some pretty fast paths to health
like you know learning how to
metabolically switch but in the end
there you are going to have to make
Health your responsibility and you're
going to have to work for it especially
as you
age and diet is a is um is one of those
things that the consequences of a bad
diet making bad dietry choices is kind
of invisible today you might not feel
great or you might get a little bit of a
stomach ache or whatever or feel a bit
bloated but it's almost like sewing
seeds for your 100y old self that you
know you don't yet see the consequence
of and this is why I think diet has to
become a bit of a religion to some
degree you don't see the ential damage
you don't see the shifting of your gut
microbiome on a on a daily basis oh you
know I used to say this all the time to
my patients I would say everything
you're doing with your lifestyle now is
preventing you from diseases you never
knew you were going to get because
you'll never get them so you didn't even
know that the 5 a.m. workout that you
chose to get up and go do is going to
actually save you from Alzheimer's 20
years from now you have no idea the
fasting lifestyle that you committed to
is actually going to save you from some
kind of hormonal cancer like the list
goes on and on because you're doing it
today to prevent tomorrow you don't and
so there's no like reward on that front
because prevention doesn't come with
like a ribbon you use the word
ketones and you used in the context of
fasting does that mean that you're an
advocate of of the ketogenic diet
because this the word is the same yeah
thank you for asking this because this
gets confusing a lot um I'm an advocate
of pulsing in ketones and my way of
encouraging people to do that is through
fasting why not the ketogenic diet so
the ketogenic diet has some upsides just
like OIC has some upsides and it has
some downsides so moving processed carbs
out of your diet is always a good idea
bringing your carb level down so your
blood sugar comes down always a good
idea but when the ketogenic diet came
out what ended up happening is people
were just eating meat or eating you know
fat and they were weren't eating any
fruits and vegetables okay for women
fruits and vegetables are really
important you got to have that fiber to
feed a set of bacteria in your gut that
break estrogen down so I that's why when
I talk about keto I always say it's
ketobiotic I brought the carb level back
up I was like yes stay off of processed
carbs but if you want a ketone you're
going to get that Ketone by attaching a
fasting window to every single day and
learning to metabolically switch so you
get over here and you make a ketone from
fasting not from manipulating your food
over and over and over again which has a
long-term challenge how long do I have
to fast for in order to metabolically
switch Yeah so eight hours is usually
what they say where the the system
starts to move from sugar burner to fat
burner it usually takes about four hours
to get over there so we always say 12
for additional hours okay so well yeah
thank you for pointing that out so 12
hours and now you're pretty much over
into this fasting window your
intelligent body what it's doing is it's
saying it's been 12 hours glucose hasn't
gone gone up and we haven't had any
nutrients
well we're going to switch into our
other fuel source and we're going to
burn fat to make a ketone so everybody's
a little different because some people
don't switch as easy some people take a
little longer to make a ketone I mean we
we saw some incredible hurdles that
people hit trying to get into the fasted
state that were because what I call
their metabolic switch was sluggish they
had never really practiced this before
and so it didn't when they were going 12
hours all of a sudden they weren't
making a ketone and they were just
hungry and so what we started to do is
teach them things like okay let's this
is this is a large reason why the new
book is around is because I needed to
create a food manual to help them clean
up their food system so they could
switch over into the fasted system much
easier if I'm drinking you know coffee
or water or these kinds of things is
that going to interrupt the process of
metabolically switching you should be
fine with water now I have definitely
seen some really extreme cases where
people even have a blood sugar Spike
from water but very extreme uh coffee
most people would do okay with coffee uh
it's what you put in your coffee that's
a problem if it's just black coffee
black coffee should be fine okay now
make sure it's chemical free don't don't
you know make sure it's organic like
there's a like make it make it clean so
those two are pretty are pretty good um
teas can be fine to drink in the fasting
window um what are the common mistakes
people make when they're in intermittent
fasting that or you know the common
myths around the process that someone
who thinks they know it's mittent
fasting could well be making so if we
stay in the fasting window idea um I'll
tell you a couple of that I've seen like
people drinking diet diet a diet drink
that has chemicals in it and so and or
or a synthetic sweetener that actually s
imates hunger so you know some of the
diet drinks that are out there there's a
whole bunch of them so people think I
can just drink if we go with the mistake
people just think I can drink whatever I
want then it's just not eating I've even
had questions of can I can I do fruit
juice like no it's not not eating you're
trying to get your blood sugar down so
you switch over into this ketogenic
Energy System so I would say the fasting
window people can trip over themselves a
little bit then I would say you know of
course women specifically fasting all
the time that's why I I did Fast like a
girl was women needed to know how to
fast to their
Cycles uh the other mistake that uh
people make is they think well they
don't have to clean up their food and
that's your that's your you know that's
your prerogative but if you clean up
food your food system you're going to
make fasting a lot easier so I think
those are some of some of the biggies I
would say other ones that might be
helpful for people listening and I'm
thinking about the conversation with
your girlfriend friend is thinking that
there's a one siiz fits all for fasting
like some people like to skip dinner
other people like to skip breakfast I
have plenty of people in our community
that do lunch to lunch fasting you get
to decide where your eating window goes
it's not a there's and you know there's
a lot of theories like I'm a big fan of
eating the light don't eat in the dark
when you eat in the dark melatonin's in
and melatonin makes you more insulin
resistant so EA in the light and just
make that your fasting window look at
the what the light patterns are so
there's some really good evidence there
but it's all customizable to you and
your lifestyle oh I have I have patients
and friends who are like sitting down at
the table for dinner with my family is
the most important moment of my day and
that happens at 8 o'clock at night and
so I'm like great eat then enjoy that
experience and build that maybe your
fasting window is two to nine or 10 you
must have so many people that listen to
your work read your books and then they
still can't do it they still can't fast
they still get beaten by the hunger
craving that comes at 11: p.m. and then
the next day at 8:00 a.m. it just wins
it just keeps winning and they're
listening to you over and over again but
the hunger cravings the sugar Cravings
just keep winning and they just keep
failing at this idea of fasting you know
I it's funny because maybe I just don't
see it as much I mean we've get hundreds
of thousands of comments across our
socials you know every week and I try to
I try to keep a pulse on them um but so
I may not see all the maybe the people
who can't fast maybe they don't leave
comments even so um but there was a
really interesting study called the
Every Other Day Diet and the other Every
Other Day Diet this years ago was a
researcher who took a group of people
who were in a metabolic crisis and like
they're cholesterol was high their
hemoglobin A1c was high their liver
enzymes were off blood pressure I mean
everything was bad and they were eating
the Western Standard diet and she said
you can eat whatever you want but you're
going to do it every other day so one
day eat go to town one day you're not
eating at all you're fasting all day and
then the next day go to town eat
whatever you want and then you're
fasting and you're going to do this for
a year and so they ended up doing it for
a year now I want to point out there was
like a third of the people that dropped
out of course so we have to like point
that out um but everybody that stayed in
it at the end of the year all their
metabolic markers improved they lost
weight but the thing that shocked the
researchers the most is that their taste
buds changed what they craved changed so
when they hung in there and they did it
over a period of time all of a sudden
they went from cha you know craving a
hamburger and fries to create to you
know craving a salad with some protein
on it and that was very unconscious
and I've thought a lot about that study
and like why did that happen and I
believe it happened because of the
microbiome changes our taste buds are
not always a brain decision sometimes
they're a microb decision and if I have
a set of bad bacteria because I've been
feeding bad bacteria you know these
toxic foods then yeah I'm going to keep
craving it and yeah this gets difficult
but if I stick with it long enough if I
keep fasting and trying it and
experimenting with it and I I make
enough progress that I can change my
microbiome then there's a door in
because now my food cravings can start
to change how does the how does fasting
change your gut microbiome in that
situation this is a great question so uh
biggest criticism one of the biggest
criticisms of fasting is it destroys
your gut so I want to unpack this one so
here's the here's what the science is
showing when you are in a fasted State
the longer you're there the most famous
study was out of MIT 24-hour fast you
started to get these stem cells into the
gut that repaired the gut but when
you're in a fasted State these bad
bacteria get starved out and when they
get starved out there's an
opportunity now here's what I want to
want to say because the criticism is
that fasting destroys your gut
microbes so first yes it destroys the
the ones you no longer
want now second thing is that first meal
matters that first door in to your Food
Matters and if you bring in probiotic
Prebiotic polyphenol Foods my favorite
thing to break a fast with for years was
an avocado with Sauer krauts and hemp
seeds on top of it if you bring all of
that in now you're actually feeding
those good bacteria and they're you're
helping them
grow but do the good die as well when I
starve them some of them can for sure it
CH there can be um overall depletion for
sure but what you were saying is you're
like killing a lot of bacteria in the
the gut potentially but then you're
feeding the good ones that's right okay
that's right so we can't this is again
why eat like a girl came about because
of these kind of questions was what
happened was that so many people were
just you know doing six meals a day
calorie counting trying to manipulate
their food and then when they discovered
wait a second I need to think about the
timing of my food not necessarily the
quality of you know what I'm eating and
they switched over all of a sudden they
started to drop weight but the thing you
broke your fast with the sourkraut ETC
if I just start started eating that
wouldn't the bad bacteria die
anyway but because you would so you
would change the balance hopefully where
good bacteria would grow and bad
bacteria would would be out outnumbered
at that point
yeah yeah it's possible yeah guess I
think that's the slower way I'm gonna be
really honest I guess the other the
con's point would be then that it's hard
to do that because I'd still be getting
the Cravings from the bad bacteria I
those bad bacteria would still be
sending me signals through my gut
microbiome to eat hamburgers we see uh
microbiomes change within weeks food
cravings change within weeks if you just
stick with this and then you look at
that first meal matters and you make
sure you're getting those sourkrauts
you're getting hemp seeds was another
one I put on my that avocado all the
time great Prebiotic MH so if you make
that first meal really good quality and
you feed those
microbes then this is a this is a much
faster way the Every Other Day Diet I
want to say it was about six months that
they that they started to see food
changes happening cuz it wasn't until
the full year was
completed that they started to actually
see the food changes that happen I mean
anecdotally in my life when I when I
changed my diet so when I when I did
tried the key to a diet for a while and
when I've done other things I lose the
cravings for for bad foods for the sort
of like the hamburger or whatever or the
cookie fairly quickly it usually take
for me it usually takes about a week if
I don't have the bad foods for about a
week I lose my cravings for them and
I've always wondered why that is and if
there's a way to get to that point
quicker um but it's it's fasc cuz once
I'm in that in that stage where I've
lost those Cravings the next 3 4 months
my diet is impeccable but then something
might happen someone office me a brownie
or something I don't know whatever and
then I and then I'm back in that
struggle again of fighting the craving
so yeah and it you know so the the
microbes have a a piece of that um your
glucose system insulin system has has a
piece of that too um do you know what
your hemoglobin A1c is I don't you
should know that number really bloody
should that tells you what your
metabolic system is doing over 90 days
so you can see the patterns of glucose
and
insulin and you want it to be around
five hemoglobin A1c hemoglobin
A1c what if it's what I want it to be
around five you want it to be around
five and what does that mean so that
tells you that you insulin sensitive
that your metabolic system is actually
working efficiently meaning you can eat
even you know if somebody who's got a
hemoglobin A1c around five they go eat a
brownie and and we've seen this on
continuous glucose monitors though
people like this will go eat a brownie
it'll Spike up crazy high but then boom
within 60 to 90 minutes it returns back
to normal somebody with a hemog
hemoglobin A1c of 5.5 5.7 5.8 that same
brownie what will happen because those
cells aren't as insulin sensitive is
that you'll get this Spike and then two
3 hours later it takes that long for the
glucose to come down because that
insulin system is not working at its
best so I personally love that as a
Target what is hemoglobin A1c the other
piece about hemoglobin A1c that's really
important for people to understand is
that the higher that number is there's a
process called glycation going on in the
body where the red blood cells that
deliver oxygen to tissue are gummed up
with the GL extra glucose the body
doesn't know how to get into the cells
so now the red blood cell can't carry
oxygen because that's it's a big part of
what it does to tissues to oxygenate
oxygenate those tissues so close off on
this point of fasting then what are some
of the Lesser known benefits of fasting
that people don't typically think about
because we think about weight loss you
know I think that's T that's probably
the number one reason why people start
fasting because they want to burn belly
fat is that accurate from what you seen
yeah well I mean the research is really
interesting that 36 hours into a fast
the body goes and starts to burn
specifically belly fat um now that
research was done on just so we're clear
36 hours followed by 12 hours of eating
and then 36 hours of of fasting followed
by 12 for 30 days and they started to
see waist circumference go down I'm not
telling people to fast that way but I
think it is surprising when you go into
these longer fasts how you can unstick
weight but to answer your question I'm
gonna say the biggest biggest thing is
mental
health biggest like aha mental Clarity
um
happiness uh and and I believe that's
because ketones do several things they
can start to when a ketone comes on
inflammation is coming down hunger is
coming down and it supercharges the
brain so now there's this intense brain
Clarity that's like kicking in because
the Ketone think let's go back to our
hunter gatherers the Ketone when it
shows up
you're finding food and you better go
find food immediately so your focus has
to completely sharpen so you can be the
best hunter possible so now when we're
doing that in a day-to-day kind of life
that Ketone we don't we're not hunting
but we might be working we might be in
an interview and so that sharpened focus
is so amazing and then the other piece I
really like about the Ketone is with it
it brings Gaba and so Gaba Gaba calms
you what's Gaba so Gaba is a
neurotransmitter and when ketones go up
Gaba follows so again let's go back to
our Hunter and gather friends when Gaba
when ketones are up I'm focused I have
Clarity I'm hunting for food and I
better stay calm because I need to go
find food on on the point of um women
and fasting I think you said to me last
time that women shouldn't be fasting
when they're on their periods the week
before their period the week before
their period okay yeah so in the lead up
to that period they should be avoiding
fasting why is that again yeah so let's
go through the the hormones because I
think this is one this you asked me what
has surprised me on on the book coming
out I I'll tell you the other thing that
surprised me how many women don't
understand their
hormones like you're controlled by it
your behaviors your sleep your
interactions with human and we don't
have a system that's teaching women
hormones this is appalling
so when we look at the three sex
hormones when it comes through the lens
of fasting estrogen which comes in the
front half of a woman's cycle does
really well with fasting because she
likes you to be insulin
sensitive a great example of this is the
growing number of cases of polycystic
ovarian syndrome where we are seeing
insulin resistance leading to
infertility because of an imbalance in
the estrogen system and we're seeing an
increase in testosterone
because of this insulin system being off
so we need when estrogen comes in a tool
to help women to be insulin sensitive
progesterone's her twin
sister they look the same we call them
the same but she acts exactly opposite
she wants glucose to be higher she
doesn't do well with cortisol cortisol
comes in she's she's she's gone away I
always say when progesterone goes high c
is shy and cortisol is the like
stressful man yeah so in a woman's
30-day period you have moments where es
estrogen is making her Peak and you have
moments where progesterone is making her
Peak so if she's on the keto diet if she
is in calorie restriction if she is
fasting all the time she's not honoring
The rhythms of these two hormones and
that is a major problem so we say don't
fast the week before your period because
you need glucose to be higher and you
don't want cortisol to be high and just
like exercise increases cortisol so does
fasting so what's going to happen if you
if you if you fast the week before you
period what's the consequence yeah so
what we have typically seen is women
lose their
Cycles okay you need progesterone so so
let's go through let's put it through
the lens of a woman's brain around day
20 like progesterone's building building
building building she has to Peak and
then the when she hits a peak the
uterine lining sheds and you have a
period okay if you are fasting during
that time and you didn't bring your gluc
glucose up high enough progesterone may
not Peak and then you don't have that
shed of blood when you shed every single
month that menstrual blood that comes
out there are four major chemicals in
them there are phalates there are
parabens there are forever chemicals and
there're are Plastics they can actually
measure that in a woman's menstrual
blood
so if she's not
bleeding then she's not
detoxing because those four chemicals
are toxic they're toxic yes what do you
what do you say to those PE people um
that are don't have menstrual cycles and
they're you know because listen
obviously I've never been through that
myself but um I have a partner who's
been very open I think she did a post
last week on her Instagram describing
the journey that she went on to try and
get her menstrual cycle back and she
successfully has now um she's 31 she
same age as me now and she had you know
many years where she had an inconsistent
or non-existent menstrual cycle um and I
got to observe firsthand how frustrating
saddening confusing that is and how you
feel like you're broken in some way if
you're not having a menstrual cycle as a
woman so what do you what what can what
do we offer those women well for I I
applaud your girlfriend for doing that I
I first want to say that like getting
your cycle back not only just for
pregnancy but for General Health is it's
brilliant like so smart to do that um
you know I think a lot of women think
it's great they don't have a menstrual
cycle that's con that's a little bit in
the culture right now um so for th to
those women who feel like this is a
blessing they don't have a cycle I'd ask
them to rethink that um even if they
don't want to have kids let's rethink it
because your body needs to shed every
single month so there's that for the
other women that are struggling to get
their periods the first thing that and
I'd be curious if your if your
girlfriend discovered this is that we
have to realize that a woman's body is
rhythmic it has times where we can be
outgoing and we can conquer the world
and there's times we're going to sit on
the couch and do nothing and there's
times that we're really happy and
there's times don't look at us that way
because we're going to our hormonal
system is agitated so we are constantly
in a state of rhythm
and when you're not shedding you're
missing a major part of your Rhythm that
is makes you a woman we talked about
this last time and it was the first time
as a employer I started to reconsider
how we run our business because if women
do need certain accommodations based on
their
cycle um what might be an optimal way
for an employer to set up a working
schedule for a woman which would be
accommodating of her cycle so this is
what I came up with is I we we talked
about this idea of like three days off
every single month what if every
employee had three days off every single
month no questions asked you take it
when you want to take it and then
there's an educational process for the
women that we recommend you take it the
week before your period because that's
going to absolutely help you in
supporting your hormonal health and what
we know is if you take it off the week
before your parent that when you come
back you're going to be an even better
version of yourself so it's again not a
weakness so I would think you would take
some chunk of time and and you let your
employee use their prerogative because
you can't tell them you know when to
take time you know when to use it with
their period I think that's the most
Fair because then the men can do it too
yeah I don't know how you feel about
that aslo maybe we're doing that already
then because we do offer what we call
unlimited holiday I guess it's more like
a responsible holiday policy where
people can take as much time as they
like so someone like Jack in the team
also applies for me can decide to take
as much holiday as he want when he wants
and I have no
idea sat here now how much holiday Jack
has taken this year for example or why
he's taking it and when he's taking it
yeah I guess therefore with that in
place people can decide to do that
without having to broadcast why they're
off to the company exactly and and to
the women in the company what they need
to know is that that day that like
everything is crashing down on you and
your your stress is coming from all
different angles and you have to get up
and push through on that day and it's
day 25 of your menstrual cycle if it is
appropriate on that day for you to stay
home and you work in a company like this
that is no questions asked then stay
home and nurture
yourself and and be aware that every
moment a woman is pushing through that
week before her period she is destroying
her hormonal system now there are little
pushes through and there are big pushes
through so I'm talking about the big
pushes through I'm not talking about the
moment you wake up and you're like yeah
it's going to be a boring day or there's
some difficult conversations I have to
have today I'm talking about the moment
when your Energy's down you have brain
fog you might be having some cramps you
might be really irritable and you're
like I can't take one more thing how
about I have this really cool company I
work for what if I just nurture and
myself today and take care of myself so
I can show up tomorrow a better
person one of the other things that I
wanted to talk to you about because I I
noticed it popped into my fridge after
our conversation um and I know my
partner listened to the conversation as
I said to it was translated into a bunch
of languages so her her family got to
listen to it in Spanish as well um was
this this apple cider vinegar
thing in the door of my fridge there's
apple cider vinegar and I wasn't sure
what it was the other day so I drank a
bit and it disgusting but I I it looked
kind of like apple juice or something um
and I tried it and it was really
disgusting but apple cided vinegar is
currently in the door of my fridge my my
partner she's so smart she she's ahead
of me on all of these things why is it
in the door of my fridge have you tried
have you tried it I tried it it was
disgusting it's totally a little bit too
strong but I tried it straight from the
bottle and then I put back yuck well so
I'll I'll give you the reason why in
here in a second but I have the same
experience I do not like apple cider
vinegar although they've come out with
some really good modifications and
drinks with it which which is amazing
and um you know we're always trying to
look at how we can support people on our
YouTube channel and um one of our
Consultants was like oh you need to do a
video on apple cider vinegar and I was
like really because I don't really like
apple cider vinegar it's hard to avocate
something I don't like and so I finally
did one and it it went viral like
everybody wanted to know about apple
cider vinegar so here's why it works is
it stabilizes blood sugar so let's
unpack this though because this is
really interesting so apple cider
vinegar can be taken before a meal or
after a meal to have a different glucose
response so a less of a glucose response
so that's why people use it I don't know
when she's drinking it but typically
people would do it before a meal or
after a meal to make sure that the
glucose Spike wasn't high so the second
question then to ask yourself is why
does that work so apple cider vinegar is
incredibly nurturing to the gut mic
microbes and your gut microbes actually
control your blood sugar levels they
have a they send a bacterial signal to
the liver because the liver is a major
fat burning organ it's a major
participant in balancing blood sugar and
the two of them coordinate a blood sugar
response of a
meal so let's use a woman on birth
control for decades there's new studies
showing that that actually upregulates
some B
bacteria that bad bacteria when food
hits it has a Heyday and has this really
exaggerated uh glucose
response okay she takes some some uh
apple cider vinegar and now we've got
her glucose res her bacteria favoring a
better glucose
response and how many how many times a
day do you think men and women should be
eating because there's this one meal a
day thing that's people subscri
subscribe to where you just have one
meal every single day but is that I'm
I'm unsure whether that's healthy for
both men and women at all stages in
their cycle if we bring both men and
women into that conversation I like to
look at Feast famine cycling is what
you're is best let's go back to our
Hunter and gather people one sometimes
they would make a big kill and they
would Feast for days they didn't fast
they were like we have food we don't
have refrigeration they would Feast for
days and then then they would all of a
sudden go into a famine State and now
they're in a famine State and now they
got to go out and they're fasting for
days so this is how our human body was
created so now when we're doing one meal
a day we're not we're not really
mimicking that we're mimicking pieces of
that when we're eating all day we're
only mimicking the kill we're not
mimicking the hunt so I think variation
is really great and um it gives freedom
and flexibility like it allows you to
have one meal one day and three the next
and two the next and it gives you that
ability to just be in flow with with
food and not be so rigid so I'm not a
one meal a day fan and I'm definitely
not a one meal a day fan for women why
uh this is how this whole concept
started was all the one meal a day women
um were doing it for 90 days or longer
never cycling it showed up on my YouTube
channel and they had lost their periods
their hair was falling out um they were
agitated because they weren't minding
this week before their cycle so you know
one meal a day maybe for the first 10
days of your cycle okay that would work
but then let's switch out when we go
into ovulation and eat more meals a day
more yeah yep interesting okay are there
any drinks that you would um recommend
for specifically for weight loss and
repair well we started with apple cider
vinegar so I think we've we've addressed
that that you could drink that in your
fasting window um especially with people
who have really high blood sugar and
they can't seem to get it down try
drinking that in your fasting window I
think that that's a really interesting
Insight um the the second one in the in
the morning is coffee um there are signs
that coffee and studies showing that it
can speed up our metabolism now if you
don't drink coffee um I'm not telling
you to go drink it but there is some
really interesting indications that that
people who drink C coffee have a faster
metabolism okay so you could do that um
uh capsium something spicy so cayenne
pepper which is a spice has a heat to it
and that heat is actually been proven to
speed up metabolism honey honey what do
I think of honey what you think of honey
raw would be best because it anytime we
get anything Raw it's got the enzymes in
them anytime we pasteurize it now we've
killed it because we had to heat it up
so I like honey I think it's a great
sweetener um it's a little higher on the
glycemic index than like you know things
like Stevia that people seem to love I
hate the taste of stevia so I would I
would slant towards honey um but I I
have a problem with honey I I think I
think we got a little crazy on
sweeteners like we got we got like let's
go back to real food people and honey is
a real
food all are there foods that you
consider to be cancer
feeding yeah well sugar sugar okay so
yeah Sugar's a bigy but but are there
are there certain foods that we all
assume are healthy like what are what
are the foods that you know your kid I
anybody that's not spending a lot of
time doing the research think they are
consuming that are beneficial to them
that are in fact cancer feeding okay so
one of them that was years ago was the
um processed Meats yeah and hot dogs
specifically I don't know if you
remember this study but it showed like
kids that ate processed meats you know a
couple of times like I and I and I don't
know the exact so I don't want to
misquote the study but the general theme
was when you had processed Meats
consistently throughout a week you had a
higher case of leukemia that's the the
correlation they were looking for so
processed Meats have chemicals in them
so that would be that would definitely
be one um I mean the sugar cereals are
are are p with chemicals the the toxic
oils and like donuts like horrific for
children um juice boxes the gogurts oh
my gosh my kids would like what's that
it's like yogurt that has been packed
with sugar and artificial colorings that
make it blue and then put into a tube I
I I Hope they've changed this put into a
plastic tube and kids would just like
slurp it out of this plastic tube and
there every single ingredient in there
was talk toic and it was in a toxic
container and and and to to continue
this thought I know you've done St
you've had guests on here about
obesogens so let's go back to the Gogurt
all those things I just mentioned are
obesogens and what are obesogens doing
to children they and they're doing this
to pregnant women they are turning their
stem cells into fat cells they're
telling their they're reprogramming
their stem cells specifically the stem
cells that make bone cells and they're
telling those stem cells make fat cells
and one of the things we're seeing right
now is the height of children is less
than it's ever been and the weight of
children is greater than it's ever been
when we have a world of obese children
we have a chronic health problem coming
down the line and those are the kind of
things where I just get IR rate with the
food industry we have to change that
because well- intending parents don't
know this and so they go in and they're
like oh my kid's so happy with the
Go-Gurt I just want to make them happy
and it's got fruit in it and it says and
it says all
natural which is a buzzword that has no
regulations on it what is an
obesogen so obesogens were are chemicals
that are allowed in our food that turn
well they do two things but the big
thing that I'm really focused on right
now is they turn our stem cells into fat
cells and what is a stem cell great
question so a stem cell is a cell that
can go anywhere in the body and it can
it can repair anything it can make
anything so it's like a universal cell
it can do anything it can make an
eyeball it can make an an ankle and you
have a ton of them when you're little
and you lose them after about 30 you
don't lose them completely but they
start you start to get less of them and
they're a good thing production of stem
cells is a good thing yeah yeah they're
they're a stem cell is a great thing so
one of my FV or you know favorite is a
tough word to say one of the most
interesting uh reviews that I've seen on
obesogens was put out by um science for
public interest citizen science for
public interest it's a beautiful PDF and
basically it has list after list and
study after study of these obes aens and
all the ways that they H are altering
our stem cells and turning them into
reprogramming them into these fat cells
and all the different ways that the
Obesity crisis we are seeing right now
in our children comes from these
chemicals that are allowed in our food
and then it lists list after list after
list of everything that we are putting
into food that we are lathering our body
that is in our chemical environment and
how these massive influx of chemicals is
contributing to
obesity and specifically in a younger
generation now let's zoom out let's zoom
out big picture what's happening in our
culture right now our culture is like
like obesity is a problem it you know we
went from an immune system problem to
really understand we have an obesity
problem and across many countries and
it's not just in adults it's in kids
does that mean that every single person
that is obese right now is
undisciplined I argue no it's because
what we are eating is re programming our
cells to make fat cells and now we've
come up with a drug to be able to solve
that
problem that's a huge beef for me that's
a that that is at the core of that that
is
wrong
why we haven't gotten to the root cause
let's fix the food system we have to fix
the food system if we don't fix the food
system we are going to have problems
Beyond obesity we're going to have
cancer problems we're going to have
anxiety problems we're going to have you
know all the brain challenges that come
with that they're
cytotoxins toxins that rev up the
nervous system just ask any parent who
ever gave their child a Go-Gurt what was
their mood they might have been happy
eating it but how were they within the
next couple hours afterwards bouncing
off the walls it's an
exotoxin it's an interesting point that
okay we might be skinny but we might
still be suffering with the Cancers and
the Y I don't know the adhd's and stuff
like that things that are linked to um
our diets y so we might be skinny but we
might appear to be healthy on the
surface we might not have the know the
type diabetes whatever but it doesn't
mean we're going to be any better 73% of
Americans right now are overrated or
over Beast so the skinny population is
is move is going away very quickly I did
a a research for England here recently
because I'm speaking at a conference
this weekend it's like
64% of um people in England are either
overweight or obese or you know we've
got 30% of our children like not
teenagers like children that are under
13 and under are obese and we have 50%
of teenagers that are obese we have a
chemical problem we have an obesogen
problem that needs to be addressed so my
biggest beef is that we I'm not is that
we came up with OIC okay phenomenal
temporary solution can we please get to
the root
cause and that's what's not being
addressed and and and and the the media
the the way the information gets put out
there is we don't understand why yes we
do we understand why and we have pl we
just don't want to address the why if
there's too much money in the food
industry to change that and that is
Criminal and as a parent I am not okay
with that even though my kids have you
know are are beyond that point but it it
it is something that every parent should
be irate about and the only way we're
going to change that is we vote with our
dollars and we start to buy our kids
natural healthy real food that doesn't
have these obesogens in them what does
that world look like if I gave you a
magic wand and I said okay you're going
to be the president of the entire world
and you can Implement any rule as it
relates to food you know that you want
what you do day
one uh day one we Implement an education
system okay A a body and a food
education system so we empower the
individual and we teach them metabolic
switching now for kids we can we can put
that one aside because I'm not
advocating for kids to fast but I am
advocating for kids to understand their
blood sugar why not kids fasting well we
have the the tricky part of Eating
Disorders so I you know I'm a fan of a
child who's under 13 teaching them their
own natural rhythm with food so what
happens is we say kitchen closes at 700
breakfast is the most important meal you
only have a lunch break from 12:00 to 1
at school so you got to eat that then so
we take that intuitive sense that kids
should get around when I'm hungry and
when I'm not hungry and we completely
like make that go away so I would start
to bring in a more intuitive sense and
allow help educate I mean kids we if
we're talking about kids right now help
educate them on what it means to be
hungry when and and find their own
internal guidance system there with
adults I here's what I would do day one
I would put continuous glucose monitors
on every person on the
planet and I would say okay
eat just eat and let's see what your
response is that would change every
single person's relationship to Food Eat
Your Favorite Foods eat the foods you
don't like eat them all and look at the
glucose response and now you have you
see The Logical consequence of
that that would be so powerful if we
could if we could do that and then the
the next thing I would do is I would
outlaw chemicals in our food completely
outline like no more let's go back to
real food all chemicals all chemicals if
I go into a supermarket what do I
see oh thank you you see uh fruits and
vegetables and and when you look at them
they're not shiny they're not all the
same size they're all different sizes
some are a little bit less ripe they're
not not all unripe they're all some of
them are more ripe they look like
something that came out of your backyard
garden ugly like very different I would
have for people who want to eat meat and
I'm I'm a fan of people eating meat I
would have healthy meat that hasn't been
pumped with antibiotics hasn't been
pumped with G growth hormone healthy
meat I would have eggs from not just
chickens but ducks that have we get a
variety of eggs in there I if we could
have breads I'm not opposed to breads
maybe there's sourdough Breads and
fermented foods but this grocery store
that we would create in the future all
of these Foods would actually spoil
within a week it's not great for
business not great for
business which is why we don't see
it wanted to talk to you about our
sponsor LinkedIn for all of the
entrepreneurs and business owners that
listen to this podcast you're probably
want to hear this one so stay tuned for
a second whenever you're scaling and
building a business your business needs
are completely unique and I've been
there I know what struggles you're
facing and what allows you to land your
next dream client and one tool that is
an absolute must is LinkedIn ads you'll
have direct access to a billion LinkedIn
members yes a billion members access to
70 million decision makers and 10
million c-level Executives on LinkedIn
the pool of individuals that LinkedIn
allows you to access is insane and
uncomparable and you'll know if you
follow me on LinkedIn how prolific I am
on LinkedIn LinkedIn to me is actually
the highest returning paid social
platform and I don't think people quite
realize that so I'm giving you the diio
community a
$100 credit on your next LinkedIn ad
campaign head to linkedin.com doac 24 to
get started now the link is in the
description below we talked about cell
stem cell production does stem cell
production increase if I fast the longer
the in the longer fast yeah three days
is in the the research was 24 hours um
for gut repair so you get intestinal
stem cells but for systemic stem cells
three days 72 hours and those systemic
stem cells can do what for me they can
go anywhere in your body and repair
anything so if I have a toe injury I had
a toe injury recently I played this
football match called soccer aade um I
was thinking in the lead up to it I
really need to make sure that my toe is
healed cuz it had some like inflammation
The Joint had like I think I like almost
dislocated it I was think it did cross
my mind I did cross my mind maybe I
should fast for a couple of days yes to
um help accelerate the repair so that I
can play in this big football match
which was in London almost 50,000 people
there on this particular day which was
about about two weeks away so would
fasting help me in that situation the
story I always use is that I had an
Achilles tendon uh injury and I tried
everything and it was like not healing I
couldn't work out it was really bumming
me out and so my last resort I was like
okay let me throw a 3-day water fast at
it um on the third day I just started to
notice the pain was a little less and a
lot of that is just because the
inflammation's coming down the stem
cells were starting to kick in by the
end of the third day I'm like I think
the Pain's like 50% gone so I thought
let me stick with this and how long can
I go until the Pain's completely gone so
I ended up going five full days in a
fast State on the fifth day the pain was
completely gone and to this date it has
never come back what
happened that has to be stem cells being
active in my body going in there and
repairing that Achilles tenant I didn't
do anything that week I didn't take
supplements I didn't do any fancy
treatments I literally went into a 5-day
water fast in my body figured out how to
get the stem cells to where they needed
to go is there any scientific support
for this IDE that fasting can accelerate
repair and um heal injury muscle
skeletal wise I have not seen that
correlation stem cellwise we we have
several studies Walter Longo was the
researcher who showed that the whole
immune system gets rebooted within a
three-day water fast he went on to try
different types of fasting uh one of
them is the fast mimicking diet he
created which is like a calorie
restriction so there's a little bit
lower calorie restriction diet and he
did it with people who were type 1
diabetics and he had five days once a
month for three months he had them do
this extreme calorie restriction and he
had some some um requirements around
protein he wanted to keep them in a
state of autophagy so he kept protein
under 20 grams and what he found after
three months is that the pancreatic
cells were actually starting to regrow
themselves from that style of fasting
it's called Fast mimicking diet which is
just calorie restriction just calorie
less than 800 800 calories less than um
uh 20 grams of protein it must be pretty
easy to test this because you could
theoretically bring in a group of I know
100 people and I don't know give them a
little cut or a little pin prick or
something and then put them on different
diets and see how quickly they healed
from that cut or whatever you would
think yeah I think you could probably do
it and and really look at it that way
way um yeah I mean I'm sure and and I I
haven't done a specific Pub Med search
just on uh muscle scalp to repair and
fasting uh you have me thinking so I'm
going to put my research on researchers
on it and then I'll send you what I find
great because I'd love to know I was
throwing everything at my bloody too I
was like icing it and putting it up in
the air to try and get the people told
me that that helped inflammation and I
was and eventually in the leadup to the
game I I took um ibuprofen some like
antiinflammatories which I absolutely
never take I never take any medication
because I was just trying to throw
everything at it so it would have been
good to know in future that if I have
some kind of injury that fasting might
be that long stage fasting might be
useful I mean we see people we get so
many like comments of people like joints
move better when they're like a couple
of days into a fast um so you know you
have to remember the whole inflammatory
system starts to come down and so
there's there's a body that just is in
more ease but i' I'd be curious for you
to try it what about you mentioned
protein there there's this term I saw
which was protein
cycling and I don't really know what
that means but I was hoping maybe you
could enlighten me where did you see
that I saw that that protein cycling is
a useful part of your waist weight loss
regime reading an article about it so so
let's talk about protein in general um
definitely protein is the hero
macronutrient of the day like there's no
doubt protein we need more protein and I
really like this idea of and I the
research supports it there's experts out
there that are talking about it that I
think is phenomenal and I like this idea
of making sure you have at least 30
grams of protein especially at your
first meal it opens up a amino acid
sensor system that now makes your
muscles very grabby and receptive to all
other protein that you eat the rest of
the day so I really like that I also
think it's very interesting to figure
out how to get one gram of protein for
or one and a half grams of protein for
every every kilogram of body weight or
one one to two grams of protein for
every pound of body weight you want to
be so your ideal weight okay okay let's
say you're 130
lbs so you would need 130 gram of
protein so how you going to get that in
in a day now some people are like I'll
just eat a big steak and I'll get it in
allinone go but what I have seen is that
for some people when they eat a lot of
protein their body can't take the influx
in one meal and so it turns to excess
glucose which then turns to extra fat so
I'm a fan of dosing it in you do 30
grams here 50 grams there 70 grams there
there was old research this has now been
updated but there were old re was old
research showing that the pulsing in
they call it protein cycling actually
was the best way to get protein into
your system that way how' you dose it in
just baiting well let's put it in
applicable terms so you have a smoothie
um maybe it's got 30 grams and then a
couple hours later I'm going to go with
the meat world like you have a you know
a bunch of hard-boiled eggs maybe you
have like a scrambled eggs maybe then
two hours later you have a chicken
breast on top of some uh bed of lettuce
I heard that I don't know this was years
ago I heard this that we can only like
process 20 grams of protein a day anyway
so we're all like having too much
protein anyway in our diets I think
that's changed um I'm not up to speed on
like 2024 what what we're saying but I
can tell you from the protein experts
that are out there there's a huge push
right now to eat more protein because
and and it's not 20 grams a day
I I remember someone telling me because
I was back in the day when I was having
a lot of protein shakes they were
telling me it doesn't really matter if
you drink more protein because your body
can only process like 20 grams a day so
it's just going to poop it out or
convert it to glucose and I you know I
can I again I'm going to go back to what
I've seen clinically um that some people
eat protein and and they all of a sudden
this is women again I should probably be
more you know women is really my
specialty so when I look at women eating
more protein a lot of them especially
the younger women
um all of a sudden like their workouts
are better they grow muscle better like
they really love that extra protein I've
also seen women who are going through
the per menopausal years that are really
metabolically unhealthy and they jump on
this pro protein idea and they start
eating too much protein and they
minimize carbs and they just start
gaining weight and so it's because
there's just too much glucose in the
system and that they're not insulin
sensitive yet and so that's just turning
that extra protein is just turning back
into more glucose and when you have
extra glucose the body stores it as fat
so I I think we're back at this
personalized idea there's some Concepts
that are really great now you experiment
with them and see what works best for
you how important is our liver in all of
this oh it's the most important yeah
outside the brain brain gut
liver keep those
healthy like keep those really healthy
so
liver breaks down hormones so you need
it to break down hormones like thyroid
hormone let's use thyroid for example
the brain sends a signal to the thyroid
to make TSH goes to the thyroid tells
the thyroid to make T4 what's that so T4
is a thyroid version of a thyroid
hormone the four stand stands for how
many iodine sites it has T4 is unusable
to the cell so what T4 has to do is it
has to go on the liver and the gut where
those those two organs conjugate it
convert it change it into something
called T3 T3 is now usable to your cells
and T3 goes into the cell and activates
the metabolism and everything the
thyroid is supposed to do if I have poor
thyroid Health if my gut is off because
I've been on too many antibiotics or
birth control what may end up happening
is my thyroids working fine my brain's
working fine but it's not converting
into a usable format for my cells MH so
there's an example of where a stagnant
liver a liver that's that's struggling
not healthy can actually affect a
hormones how a hormone manifests in your
body so how do I know if my liver is
healthy is there any symptoms of an
unhealthy or toxic liver well let's go
through possibilities I call them
checklists yeah okay and the reason I
call them checklists is because they may
not apply to everybody the first
question to ask if your liver is healthy
is when you go without food do you make
a Kone okay if you don't make a ketone
and you're like I've had we've had
people that are like 20 hours in 36
hours in 48 hours in they're like I'm
still not making a ketone how do they
know because we have them testing okay
so little little Ketone you the the
continuous glucose monitors they'll help
the blood sugar but you need a ketone
to help ketones to it's like a little
you prick your finger have you ever used
one no that's so interesting I didn't
know there was even a thing oh oh yeah
you should get one so you get a little
monitor yeah and you prick your finger
and then you put your blood on this
little strip and you put the strip into
this little Monitor and it tells you how
many ketones you have okay so more
ketones the better right yeah okay
interesting so if you can't make ketones
or you're you're starving would be
another or you know after a long period
you're not feeling the benefits of
fasting that could be because of your
liver so we now have okay that's liver
liver issue number one okay then we can
go to things like how do you process
alcohol like you know how there's
certain people who like you go out to
drink with them and after a couple
drinks they're dancing on the table and
then there's other people that like can
drink the whole bar and they seem like
they're completely normal compared to
when they walked in yeah so that's liver
function like what how well how quickly
is that liver
metabolizing that alcohol which one is
healthy sorry um well I actually think
metabolizing it quickly is better than
the stagnant person so the person that's
hammered yeah is going to be yeah okay
so I mean there's a lot of there's a lot
of nuance in that in that comment so
just so just so we don't get the whole
world coming after your eye on that so
um so it's how quickly are you able to
metabolize a toxin in your system and
and get it out of you so that would be
another one then we have some really
really good ones really like applicable
ones like this is based off some old
ancient strategies like corner of your
eye if the inside of your eye is yellow
according to uh iridology which is the
study of the eye as it relates to health
when the corner of the eye is yellow
that can be a sign of liver
stagnation okay another one I the inside
corner yeah so next to your nose mhm
okay another one you can look at the
bottom of your feet so bottom of your
feet when they're dry and cracking is
showing that you're not getting proper
circulation down to your feet and so it
can be a possibility that the liver is
not doing a good job of detoxing and
getting toxins out so your your
circulatory system has more Sledge in it
so the circulation isn't freely getting
down to the bottom of your feet have you
ever asked someone to show you that that
feet oh yeah really yeah feet eyes I
want to know everything cuz it it tell
feet eyes I want to know what your
menstrual blood I don't want need to see
it but I want to know is it is it clumpy
how quickly does the flow come out these
kind of things are so important how
quickly your hair grows how quickly your
nails grow what what's on your nails are
nails on rid ridges on your nails
because that could be minerals like our
body gives us a full analysis of what's
going on so I have looked at a lot of
feets and and if I look at my feet now
um never just want to take a quick look
because I never I can't remember really
looking at the bottom of my feet what is
what is a sign that my liver is not
healthy looking at the bottom of my feet
it's the real dry cracks oh no mine is
mine is soft like a baby's bottom there
you go do you want to put it up on the
table so I can see no cuz people will
sell
pictures oh that's right oh my God
the revenue if that happens yes oh my
God make that decision myself so
accurate
um okay interesting so so here's a
couple let's give people a daily routine
of what to look at to be able to see
like how your body's functioning so when
I get up in the morning that one thing I
do I always look in the I'm periodically
you know throughout the day looking in
the corner of my eyes like where what is
there a yellow tinge in there so I look
at that I also look at my tongue every
morning when I wake up do you look at
your tongue not really okay so when you
look at your tongue is it have a white
coat on it has a white coat on it that
can be a sign of candida of too much
yeast in your system and your body is
detoxing you can also look at your
tongue when you fast sometimes it'll go
black and that's like candida coming out
that's yeast coming out so make sure
you're looking at your tongue I every
morning I look at my tongue so because
at night you kind of see what's detoxing
out of you so if it's white what do I do
if it's black what do I do so if it's
white and black you have candida that's
a sign of too much yeast in the system
so I mean fasting can help uh getting
off sugar alcohol fruits can help um we
just find people who fast especially if
you go into longer fast it'll start to
change we've even done some some
interesting Community fasts where we
have people watch their fast and they
decide to break their fast based off
what their tongue is doing so if it's
white and it's black and it's getting
worse keep going if you can keep going
until it starts to turn pink and then
the outside of the tongue will actually
start to turn pink and then we know okay
the yeast is starting to die off go
ahead and break here fast so that's
that's one way that you can look at the
tongue um we already talked about the
bottom of the feet periodically looking
at that your hair and and your
nails so do you ever look at like The
Ridges of your nails no okay so when
there's a lot of ridges in your nails or
how quickly your nails are GR growing
that can be a sign of mineral deficiency
okay if your hair is falling out so on
the nails then what am I what am I
looking for I'm looking there's no
ridges in my nails perfect so you you
probably have a good mineral load okay
but if you ever look down and you see
Min you know those ridges it can be a
sign that there is is you have too many
low minerals and what kind of minerals
would you then supplement with or focus
on yeah you know I'm I'm a huge fan
right now of organic minerals that come
from the earth like fulvic and humic
acid type minerals that are coming from
like volcanic ash because they're very
very rich in in minerals that we're not
getting in your typical mineral
supplement or your food you know you
know the whole thing about uh
conventional farming and how it's
depleting the minerals in our soils
right no I feel like this is going to
get really depressing really quick
that's fine you want me to know the
truth okay so the soils that are being
monocropped or they're being til over
and over again um not from regenerative
farms uh what we are know now is that
they are deficient in minerals so the
way that it's being expressed to people
is the broccoli you have now has less
vitamin and mineral content than the
broccoli you had 10 20 30 years ago
because of how the farmers are taking
care of the soil now you go to a
regenerative Farm where there's bugs
there's weeds They Don't Spray when a
crop grows they let it die they don't
till that has more minerals so when you
are actually eating food from
regenerative Farms you're getting the
minerals that you need into your
system so when like people look at their
nails not growing they look at The
Ridges a good question if you don't want
to take a mineral supplement is ask
yourself like am I eating foods from a
regenerative Farm do I I eating fruits
and vegetables from the farmer do I know
the farmer even sounds expensive right
yeah can you see why I like
fasting it but if I fast I'm still not
getting the minerals right I know but
I'm all of these problems that we're
addressing in order to eat healthy is
expensive so I'll come back to that
comment in a second because that's a
good one to address let's let's use the
typical person they're eating the that
everything we've talked about they're
eating all the
obesogens they're they're
G gaining weight their toxic load is
high they're not getting enough vitamins
they're not getting enough minerals
their hair is falling out their menst A
woman's menstrual cycle is off their
skin is changing weird stuff is showing
up for that person if all I do is say
hey I want you to eat your fruits and
vegetables from a regenerative Farm now
okay we're adding some minerals back in
so we're starting to get some of the
nutrients that person was supposed to be
but was actually getting those all those
toxins were depleting that person's
system so we start to get them eating
fruits and vegetables from a
regenerative Farm now they're getting
the nutrients they need that aren't
being that are being depleted by these
chemicals okay so that's why in that
context just eating good healthy uh
fruits and vegetables important but what
if we put them in a fasted State let's
take that person one step further
they're metabolically challenged they're
full of toxins let's put that each day
let's start to tack on a fasting window
in that fasting window we're starting to
see glucose come down we're starting to
see the body repair and heal
itself okay now when they open up their
eating window we can have them add in
minerals so we can have them added in or
they can still eat more fruits and
vegetables from regenerative Farms but
they have to prioritize minerals in our
community we actually will have people
add in minerals in the fasted window
like take a mineral supplement take an
electrolyte supplement put it in your
fasting window so you're adding that
support in and when you say minerals
what exactly are you referring to well
there's a lot of different ones right so
magnesium zinc selenium okay those are
those are the biggies okay and it's
expensive so can I just supplement it
right because that's cheaper right so
the reason I like the fasting window is
because we're we're changing the
metabolic system
M and now we go into the eating window
let's just at least start with fruits
and vegetables coming from regenerative
Farms if you don't want to spend money
on supplements if you if you have the
resources to spend money on supplements
go ahead and do that and is there
anything else that I should be looking
for as a sort of marker of my or a
signal of My overall health we said the
eyes we said the feet we said the nails
hair how quickly your hair grows quality
of your hair like is it you know is it
always have the same moisture and
texture what's your view on alcohol oh
this is a good one um there's never a
moment where alcohol is a health food
let's just be clear on that um so I
think there the research on alcohol and
brain health is is needs to be honored
Dr Aman I know he's been on your podcast
and um he has been very clear on that
stance a lot of people have not great
for brain health
not great for Liver Health because when
there's alcohol in your liver then
you're now shutting down your liver's
ability to burn fat and to detox and do
all the other things all it's doing is
taking care of of the uh the alcohol
toxin so not great for both of those
hormones not great for hormones because
you need your liver to break down
estrogen so real and and all the other
ones but specifically so hot flashes
very common to see hot flashes go up
when women have a glass of wine or
not
so that is that's the downside what's
the upside there's an upside well I'm
gonna I'm gonna throw it out as a an and
I I'm going to be careful I say this
because I know people are going to take
my words and try to to make them
absolutes when you're drinking a lower
alcohol that is clean alcohol like a
wine that hasn't been sprayed with
pesticides that doesn't have a lot of
toxins doesn't have a ton of added
sugars in it um then you are now putting
somebody into a temporary temporary
lower cortisol
state so you're you're bringing down
their glucose you're bringing down
you're calming them down if they've been
wound up from the day and so they're a
little more in a relaxed State and they
might be a little more
social everyone once in a while I'm not
talking every day every once in a while
you Splash a glass of wine in an in and
into your life you have a a connection a
glass I'm not talking a lot you have a a
deeper connection because you're more
relaxed what happens when we're
connecting with
others um oxytocin that's right you're
bringing oxytocin up now I want I want I
really want people to hear me through on
this one because I know my words will
get very twisted on this one I want to
be really clear in this scenario you've
taken somebody who might have been very
stressed out had a really horrible day
they were not looking to connect with
their spouse they couldn't connect
because their brain is like looping you
give them a glass of wine on that one
part of the day at the end of the day
and all of a sudden they're in a little
more relaxed State and they're more in a
place where they want to connect and so
oxytocin now goes up and then they
probably my guess is the next day they
go to work they have another [__] day
they come home they drink the wine again
the problem is that
yeah if you could isolate it and not
cause the S of addiction cycle then in
isolation yeah it could yeah I mean I I
really the Nuance on that is so
important because people will literally
come after me and say I said alcohol is
a health food I'm not saying
that in the example that I just gave
where do leave room for human connection
how do we get out of this drive drive
drive overproduction stressed out so
stressed out I can't connect with
people where is Health in
that breath work yeah if they'll do
breath yeah there's a lot of other
things you're right there's a lot of
other
things so I I want to let but let's
let's let's put it in this context
because it it needs to live in a in a
scenario that we do you you go out with
friends you eat good food you have a
glass of wine you're enjoying each other
you're enjoying life is that dangerous
would the world be a better place if
alcohol didn't
exist well I think a lot of people would
say yes I mean people who have dealt
with alcoholics would definitely say Yes
um because I feel like we would have
just found a different way to connect
you know this idea that alcohol helps us
to connect is probably
because of the way we've designed the
world like bars restaurants PBS all
those kinds of things and I feel like if
we'd never discovered the invention we
would have just found another way you go
to other parts of the world where they
don't really drink they do kind of have
another way like I was in barley and
they do these like ecstatic dances where
it's like have you ever seen one of
these things it's daytime they have the
music blurring and everyone is just
going absolutely crazy they're like
dancing as if they're all absolutely
hammered and they're doing it in daytime
and then they're uh when I look at it I
go absolutely never I'm never doing it
but my my partner does it all the time
and I go but it's and I look at these
people and I go do you not realize that
you look weird and I'm saying that
through the lens of this social
construct I have that that behavior is
not normal or acceptable right you know
what I mean but it's literally like
people are going wild in daytime to
music together in a room and they have
to be feeling amazing they must feel
amazing yeah so connected so free but
it's just weird over here I mean
ecstatic dancing is a thing over here in
fact it's happens upstairs in the studio
okay um but it's not something so that's
that's oxytocin of course yeah so maybe
we should frame all of this under the
what's going to give you oxytocin we
need to do more oxytocin Rich activities
so that we can make sure we keep human
connection up because human connection
is so incredibly important and so if
ecstatic dance is your thing great you
know again to your point like the glass
of wine every once in a while might put
you in that mood to be able to connect
in all of these ways so that might that
might be a tool but not every day so um
but we have to bring back this idea
oxytocin is the most powerful hormone on
the planet so when we're sitting at home
and we're isolating ourselves and we are
in disconnection and we're pointing
fingers and we're yelling at each other
like we are we're raising cortisol we're
not raising oxytocin but if you bring
oxytocin up as soon as oxytocin comes in
cortisol goes down one of my
recommendations to menopausal women that
aren't sleeping is start petting your
dog like just pet your dog before you go
to bed because that's going to give you
oxytocin it's going to bring the
cortisol down from the day and it's
going to put you in a more relaxed state
so you can get yourself into bed if you
don't have a dog you know hug hug
somebody but if we have to look at
oxytocin as a healing hormone and what
we're talking about is this end of the
day and what I think happens is we go
produce produce produce and then okay
now now I'm done and then we go and
maybe pop on social media and then we're
like oh my God that person doesn't think
like I think or this person's saying
something wrong and we just keep amping
up our cortisol if we go back to you ask
me about my daily routine I feel like
the morning should be oxytocin filled
you can let your day be cortisol filled
if that feels right to you and then and
then you're as when you end the day
bring oxytocin back in how are you going
to do that is personal to you is there a
link between oxytocin and diet I if I'm
in an oxytocin state am I more likely to
choose a certain food I and I was
thinking here about like you know
oxytocin Rises when I hug my partner for
example so I was also thinking does that
mean that people that don't have a dog
don't have a partner don't have friends
people that are lonely are have less
oxytocin maybe more cortisol and are
therefore more likely to eat poorly I
don't know oh yeah because cortisol is
high cortisol is going to spike appetite
and going to make you is going to make
you want to eat more so yeah um but for
that person so you know there there's a
thing called havening where you just
like rub your own arms and that releases
oxytocin yeah and it calms you it it
releases oxytocin you're literally
loving on yourself and it it upregulates
the parasympathetic nervous system it
takes you out of the amydala and you're
just you're just rubbing yourself and on
your arms it's it's a bit of a stretch
but
this is how my brain works so
theoretically hugging myself can help me
lose
weight do you know what I mean yeah you
you you you you can make the real on
that one yeah but you I'm saying so Hier
oxytocin lower cortisol I'm going to
make better food choices therefore I'm
going to be um more likely to lose
weight and make better dietary
choices across the board it's something
I call the hormonal hierarchy so at the
top let's start with the bottom at the
bottom of the hormonal hierarchy is sex
hormones progesterone estrogen and
testosterone above that is insulin so if
you're insulin resistant you're going to
throw those sex hormones off okay above
insulin is cortisol if you're stressed
out I I this is another thing we saw in
our community if you're so stressed out
all the time it's going to be very
difficult for you to get into these deep
states of ketosis it may be very
difficult for you to lose weight so we
got to handle something or to help you
handle stress and the behavioral point
there which is what I know so well is
the choices I make in that state that's
right are bad that's right so but what
do you do I'm I'm going to go what if
you do if you're 48 years old you're a
menop par menopausal woman you're
hormones are all over the place you're
just agitated and irritable and you
can't get yourself out of that Loop and
cortisol is surging you go eat because
that feels that you're like give me some
dopamine is what you're looking for
there if we could just take that moment
and get that woman to think about
connection can think about laughter can
think about gratitude things like that
think about petting your dog think about
going for a walk out in nature these
kind of things start to raise oxytocin
and they start to decrease
cortisol and and it's it seems like we
put toss that aside we're like oh that's
so frivolous like no actually it's not
like there you know there was I had a
guy on my podcast recently that was
saying that they had just done a study
on smokers and they had found that
smokers that had positive relationships
in their life compared to smokers that
were lonely and didn't have as many
positive relationships the lonely
smokers had a higher incidents of lung
cancer than ones that had positive
relationships in their life that is the
power of human connection and that is
oxytocin bringing down all the other
hormones and regulating them and it kind
of insulates us doesn't it from the
stresses of life it's like insulation
that's right human connection is
insulates us against disease against I
guess even poor dietary choices in that
regard is that in part why I have a tool
box in the corner of the room because we
talked about there's a tool box over
here this is why you have a toolbox so
there's a oh there a it's a DI of a CO
toolbox this is cool this is really
[__] it's your special tool
box so I have this tool box in the
corner of the room sometimes my team
they they do these little experiments so
they'll bring something to the podcast
from doing research on the guest I'm
speaking to and then they'll put it
there and I have to be honest I haven't
opened this tool box um it's a Dio tool
box which is quite cool we will sell
these
online that's a good way to make a quick
Buck um but who should open this tool
box because I know you know you know
what's in this yes and I swear I swear
on everything that I haven't opened it
okay you want me to open it I think you
should open it and explain why you
bought a tool box so the first thing
that I want to say is whenever you're
looking at your health you need to think
about what's your toolbx how many tools
do you need in here which ones do you
need which ones are appropriate to you
okay so we talked about this in the
beginning if I was going to um remodel a
room which would I wouldn't be doing
because I don't know how to do that but
let's say I wanted to change uh
something the construction of a room I
would bring my toolbox in I wouldn't
pull out the hammer and say and the and
the screwdriver and be like the hammer
is better than the screwdriver ah I
don't need the screwdriver the hammer is
better than the screwdriver I would look
around the room and I'd be like okay
there's going to be a moment I need the
hammer there's going to be a moment I
need the screwdriver I I might and I
don't know what size screwdriver I live
in an old house you know sometimes you
need a Phillips head some sometimes you
don't like I would have different tools
this is how we should be looking at
health and what's happening is we're
looking for the one-offs so I want
everybody to create a toolbox so here's
how we look at it so okay some days I
get up and I'm like you know what today
there's fun Tools in here that I have
been eating so bad and I haven't been
getting my minerals or my vitamins so I
better I better load up on my
supplements mhm so today I I just
haven't been eating well
I need to load up on my supplements I'm
going to use my supplements okay do you
use supplements every day not every day
how come um because sometimes I don't
feel like I need them because I've had
them through my I feel like I've had
those supplements through my diet so for
example if I've if I've been in my house
in Cape Town I probably don't need my
vitamin D but when I've been in a studio
every day for days on end I think
probably my vitamin D is probably low
that's right so you you use this as it's
supposed to be used as a
to a lifestyle so when your lifestyle
all of a sudden now goes in a New
Direction you don't need that
supplement okay so it's a tool okay now
I always tell people if you're on the
same supplement over and over and over
again like it may not be working for you
anymore so okay so there's supplement
then some days let's say you've been
working too
much this is heavy and you're going to
go work out yeah
and so today like you've decided you
know what I've been traveling a lot I
haven't been prioritizing strength
training today my tool is strength
training so I'm going to make sure that
I power up on weights today we we could
have had a shoe in here and been like on
another day I might decide that I need
to do more
cardio what's better strength training
or
cardio this is a trick question it is
neither right
neither are better context dependent
that's right but we have a lot of
discussions in in the health world right
now about which one's better yeah people
are fighting over which one's more
important you got it yeah okay yeah then
what if I want to
fast here's my empty
plate what if I decide you know what
today I need to get to autophagy I need
to shed some of those cells that are
dysfunctional so I'm going to make sure
that I fast longer today because I need
to access that internal part of me okay
there's my little clock so today I'm
just going to set my timer and I'm going
to fast for 17 hours because I need
autophagy okay one day I wake up and I
don't I don't feel like fasting so is
fasting right or or not fasting which
tools right they're both the same
they're is when are you going to use
them when you need to got it okay then
all of a sudden I realize I haven't
really been prioritized in protein I
like eggs they've got lots of choline in
them I better power up on eggs today so
that I can because Co we know choline
helps with brain health so eggs are
phenomenal are they phenomenal every day
some days more than others right I I
have a more brain power I need today
maybe I'll do so we'll so we'll go ahead
and power up on an egg but doesn't mean
we have eggs every day okay what about
if my hunger's been off the chart I
can't stabilize my blood sugar I'm going
to add more fats in I'm going to have an
avocado so I pull out my avocado one day
and now I eat it and all of a sudden I'm
like wow that's so much better like I
can fast longer the next day I'm I I
feel like my blood sugar is more stable
and more mentally clear is the avocado
the
hero not always not always it was just
your body needed more fat that day okay
what about I you know for my menopausal
friends all the sudden I'm getting hot
flashes and I realize I haven't really
been prioritizing fiber I haven't really
been giving cruciferous vegetables to my
liver maybe maybe I've been drinking a
little too much so I'm going to need to
power up on my my cruciferous fibrous
vegetables to help support my liver for
anyone just on audio she's pulled out
some broccoli from the tool box broccoli
yeah so now all of a sudden I eat more
broccoli I'm all of a sudden noticing
that my hot flashes are going away did
the broccoli is the broccoli the reason
my hot flashes went away that day it is
right if that day it was because your
liver needed more support and your gut
needed more fiber to be able to break
remember we have a whole set of bacteria
in our gut called the estrobolome that
to be able to break down estrogen so
it's usable for your C same thing with
the thyroid like we talked about maybe
all of a sudden your metabolism speeds
up because you gave your liver and got a
better better choices and so now your
thyroid starts working better for you
all of these go on and on and on they're
all just tools the last one is the one
we've been talking about oh wow look at
that an amazing
product what if I haven't prioritized
oxytocin I've been working too much I
haven't been really like my friends I
haven't really been prioritizing friends
or family I know I got to get together
with them but they don't really want to
hear about my workload so let me figure
out another way to connect to them so
I'm going to grab this really cool Diary
of CEO conversation cards I'm going to
take that over and I'm going to tell my
friend I just want to hang out with them
and we're going to have a good
conversation these are all tools the
goal of health is for us all to create a
unique toolbox one that works for us
that becomes effortless over time if we
stick with rigidity if we're like prot
animal protein is the best no plant
protein is the best fasting is good no
fasting is not good oh we should be
strength training no we should be car
doing cardio all of these things in
isolation are not Health when we put
them together and we customize them for
our own specific needs now we are on our
own health path but we can't isolate
them
anymore we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're leaving it for and
the question that's been left for
you is dear guest first person to say
that dear guest are you in love
with life and is life loving you
back um I'm absolutely in love with life
I um and I'll tell you why I I love what
I'm doing I
love how we started this like that one
woman who now believes in herself and to
have that over and over again fuels me
and and gets me out of bed every morning
and makes me show up in London and have
conversations with you and I have
amazing friends and amazing family like
I have connections I love my life and at
54 I love my life now more than I've
ever loved it and I have to say of all
the people that I meet you're one of the
people that I'm convinced is loving life
and it I'm convinced it's also loving
you back on and off camera um you really
are a wonderful human being thank you
and you're doing work that is so
critical to so many um I recommend
everybody goes and reads the book fast
like a girl even if you're not a girl I
have to say because I learned a ton
about my partner about my wife about
myself from reading this book but also
your your book eat like a girl um is
equally critical for anyone that's
looking for really practical ways to
upgrade and think about their nutrition
through the lens of everything we've
discussed today I'll link both of those
books below um they're must reads thank
you so much AB pleasure to see you again
yeah and the feeling's mutual I just
keep doing what you're doing because
it's profound so I I feel honored to
have been here twice so thank you for
everything you're doing
oh
[Music]